Update draft-iab-covid19-workshop.md (#21)
intarchboard/covid19-workshop: draft-iab-covid19-workshop.md

on-going travel and contact restrictions at that time.

COVID-19 has caused changes in user behavior, which in turn drove 
change to Internet traffic. These changes in user behavior appeared rather abruptly 
and were significant, in particular during the introduction of the
initial quarantine and work-from-home arrangements. The changes to Internet traffic relate

> to volumes, location, types, as well as security and attack methodologies,

Reviewer: While I understand the desire to mention security, I think it really does fit here. I think the first directly consequences of sending everybody home was a change in traffic patterns. Chances in attack behaviour and new security practices where a consequence of that (slightly later). Or what you actually means by security mythologies here?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to traffic volumes, location of traffic, as well as shifts in the type of traffic
```

or otherwise depending on the network for their daily lives, network
traffic volume has surged. Internet service providers and operators have
reported a 20% traffic growth or more in a matter of weeks. Traffic at

> Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) is similarly on the rise, as were attacks targeting remote working infrastructure and platforms. Most forms

Reviewer: I don't think just adding this half-sentence here helps. The point here is about increase in traffic volume (without characterising the traffic at this point). It would probably be much better to add a separate paragraph about attack traffic rather then trying to "sneak" it in at places where it doesn't belong.

> Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) is similarly on the rise, as were attacks targeting remote working infrastructure and platforms. Most forms

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) is similarly on the rise. Most forms
```

of network traffic have seen an increase, with conversational

> multimedia traffic growing in some cases more than 200% and an explosion in COVID-19 related scams and phishing. And user time

Reviewer: Same here. Let's rather at a separate paragraph (please provide a separate PR if possible). video traffic is really only meant to be one example where we have a high number.

> multimedia traffic growing in some cases more than 200% and an explosion in COVID-19 related scams and phishing. And user time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multimedia traffic growing in some cases more than 200%. And user time
```

spent on conferencing services has risen by an order of magnitude on
some conferencing platforms.

> Some themes of the workshop focused on an increase in Internet usage more generally, with reference to measurement and performance - where others focused on user experience and problems arise directly from the pandemic, such as home working and user behavioral changes.

Reviewer: Not sure what the actual content of this statement is supposed to be. But it seems a bit misplaced here in the reading flow for mw.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

In general, the Internet has coped relatively well with this traffic
growth, albeit not without some issues. For instance, some outages,
video quality reduction, a new wave of attacks and scams, and other issues were reported. Nevertheless,

> it is interesting to see how the technology, operators, service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is interesting to see how the technology, implemented by operators and service
```

> providers and incident responders have been able to respond to large and sudden changes in traffic

Reviewer: This was really just focusing on the Internet technology (which is applied by network operators) and not to be an exhausted list of all entities involved. Again I think a separate paragraph would be much better than trying to squeeze things in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
providers have been able to respond to large and sudden changes in traffic
```

patterns.

Understanding what actually happened with Internet traffic is of
course interesting by its own right. How that impacted user

> experience, the security ecosystem, or the intended function of the services is equally

Reviewer: Here it also don't seem right to call out the security ecosystem separately (and only the security ecosystem).

> experience, the security ecosystem, or the intended function of the services is equally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experience or the intended function of the services is equally
```

interesting. Measurements of and reports on Internet traffic in 2020
are therefore valuable. But it would also be interesting to understand

> what types of network management, security responses and capacity expansion actions were

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what types of network management and capacity expansion actions were
```

understand the impact of traffic shifts and growth more generally, or
to prepare for future situations — crises or otherwise – that impact
networking. Or even allow us to adjust the technology to be even
better suited to respond to changes in Internet traffic and user behavior.

The scope of this workshop included:

* measurements about traffic changes, user experience and problems, service performance, and other relevant aspects
* discussion about the behind the scenes network management and expansion activities
* experiences in the fields of general Internet connectivity, conferencing, media/entertainment, and Internet infrastructure

> * the impact on networks of COVID-related scams and increased home working infrastructure, as threat actors made use of the attack surface resulting from the shift to home-working and a global pandemic

Reviewer: Good to add another bullet point here but not sure I understand your wording: when you say "impact on networks", what networks do you mean? And what do you mean by "increased home working infrastructure"?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the impact of COVID-related scams on the home working infrastructure, as threat actors made use of the attack surface resulting from the shift to home-working in a global crisis
```

lack of understanding of security becomes a bigger issue.
Is it reasonable to expect every user of the Internet to take
password training? Or is there a fundamental problem with a technical
solution? Modern advice advocates a layered approach to security defences, with user education forming just one of those layers.

Communication platforms such as Zoom are not new: many people have used them
for years, but as COVID-19 saw an increasing number of organisations and individuals turning to these technologies, they became an attractive target, due to increased usage. In turn, there was an increase in malicious cyber actor activity, either hijacking online meetings that were not secured with passwords or leveraging unpatched software as an attack vector. How can new or existing measures protect users from the attacks levied against the next
vulnerable service?

Overall, it may be that there were fewer security
challenges than expected arising from many people suddenly working from home.
However, the agility of attackers, the importance of robust and scalable defence mechanisms, and some existing security problems and challenges may have become even

> more obvious and acute with an increased use of Internet-based services, particularly in a pandemic situation and times of uncertainty, where users can be more vulnerable to social engineering techniques and attacks.

Reviewer: Thanks these edits and additions are all great and ready to merge!

problems were corrected, many providers significantly increased their
capacity, and so on.

On the security front, the COVID-19 crisis showcased the agility with 
which malicious actors can move in response to a shift in user 
Internet usage, and the vast potential of the disruption and damage 
that they can inflict. Equally, it showed the agility of defenders, 
when they have access to the tools and information they need to protect
users and networks, and showcased the power of Indicators of Compromise
when defenders around the world are working together against the same 
problem.

In general, the Internet also seems well suited for
adapting to new situations, at least within some bounds.  The
Internet is designed for flexibility and extensibility, rather than
optimized for today's particular traffic. This makes it possible to
use it for many applications, in many deployment situations, and make
changes as needed. The generality is present in many parts of the
overall system, from basic Internet technology to browsers, from name
servers to content delivery networks and cloud platforms. When usage
changes, what is needed is often merely different services, perhaps

> some re-allocation of resources, or continuation of existing security defences, not fundamental technology or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some re-allocation of resources, as well as consequent application and
continuation of existing security defences, but not fundamental technology or
```

  economy of the societies using it. Projects and research that
  monitor Internet and services performance in a broad scale and
  across different networks are therefore important.
  
* Maintaining defensive mechanisms to be used in times of crisis: 
  Malicious cyber actors are continually adjusting their tactics to take
  advantage of new situations, and the COVID-19 pandemic is no exception.
  Malicious actors used the high appetite for COVID-19 related information
  as an opportunity to deliver malware and ransomware, and to steal user 
  credentials. Against the landscape of a shift to working from home and 
  an increase in users vulnerable to attack, and as IT departments were 
  often overwhelmed by rolling out new infrastructure and devices, IoC 
  sharing was a vital part of the response to COVID-19 related scams and 

>   attacks. 

Reviewer: This is also great to add! Thanks!

Ricky Mok for text on cloud platform; Martino Trevisan for text on campus networks; David
Clark on congestion measurements at interconnects; Oliver Hohlfeld for the text on traffic
growth, changes in traffic shifts, campus networks, and interconnections; Andra Lutu on

> mobile networks; and thanks to Jason Livingood for his review and additions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mobile networks; Kirsty Paine for text on security impacts; and thanks to Jason Livingood for his review and additions.
```
